
Early life


Lineage and childhood
Alexander was raised by a nurse, Lanike, and later tutored by Leonidas and Lysimachus. He was raised in the manner of noble Macedonian youths, learning to read, play the lyre, ride, fight, and hunt. When Alexander was ten years old, he tamed a horse that Philip had ordered away. Philip was overjoyed at this display of courage and ambition, and bought the horse for Alexander. Alexander named the horse Bucephalas, and it carried him as far as India. When Bucephalas died, Alexander named a city after him, Bucephala.

Education
Anaximenes of Lampsacus was one of Alexander the Great's teachers and accompanied him on his campaigns.

Heir of Philip II


Regency and ascent of Macedon
After the victory at Chaeronea, Philip and Alexander marched unopposed into the Peloponnese, welcomed by all cities except Sparta. Philip established a "Hellenic Alliance" (modelled on the old anti-Persian alliance of the Greco-Persian Wars), which included most Greek city-states except Sparta. Philip was then named Hegemon of this league (known by modern scholars as the League of Corinth), and announced his plans to attack the Persian Empire.

Exile and return
In the following year, the Persian satrap (governor) of Caria, Pixodarus, offered his eldest daughter to Alexander's half-brother, Philip Arrhidaeus. Olympias and several of Alexander's friends suggested this showed Philip intended to make Arrhidaeus his heir. Alexander reacted by sending an actor, Thessalus of Corinth, to tell Pixodarus that he should not offer his daughter's hand to an illegitimate son, but instead to Alexander. When Philip heard of this, he stopped the negotiations and scolded Alexander for wishing to marry the daughter of a Carian, explaining that he wanted a better bride for him. Philip exiled four of Alexander's friends, Harpalus, Nearchus, Ptolemy and Erigyius, and had the Corinthians bring Thessalus to him in chains.

King of Macedon


Accession
In summer 336 BC, Philip was assassinated by his bodyguard Pausanias while attending the wedding of his daughter. Alexander was proclaimed king at the age of 20.

Consolidation of power
After Philip's death, Alexander stopped at Thermopylae and was recognized as the leader of the Amphictyonic League. He then headed south to Corinth where Athens sued for peace and Alexander pardoned the rebels. During his stay in Corinth, Alexander met with Diogenes the Cynic and was amused by his reply. At Corinth, Alexander took the title of Hegemon and was appointed commander for the coming war against Persia. He also received news of a Thracian uprising.

Balkan campaign
Alexander defeated Illyrian chieftain Cleitus and King Glaukias of the Taulantii in open revolt against his authority, securing his northern frontier.

Destruction of Thebes
Alexander destroyed Thebes after it rebelled. He divided Thebes' territory among the other Boeotian cities. This left all of Greece temporarily at peace.

Conquest of the Achaemenid Persian Empire


Asia Minor
Alexander proceeded into mountainous Lycia and the Pamphylian plain, asserting control over all coastal cities to deny the Persians naval bases. From Pamphylia onwards the coast held no major ports and Alexander moved inland. At Termessos, Alexander humbled but did not storm the Pisidian city. At Gordium, Alexander "undid" the Gordian Knot.

The Levant and Syria
In spring 333 BC, Alexander crossed the Taurus into Cilicia. After a long pause due to an illness, he marched on towards Syria. Though outmanoeuvered by Darius's significantly larger army, he marched back to Cilicia, where he defeated Darius at Issus. Darius fled the battle, causing his army to collapse, and left behind his wife, his two daughters, his mother Sisygambis, and a fabulous treasure. Alexander proceeded to take possession of Syria, and most of the coast of the Levant. In the following year, 332 BC, he was forced to attack Tyre, which he captured after a long and difficult siege. The men of military age were massacred and the women and children sold into slavery.

Egypt
After his death, Alexander the Great founded Alexandria, which became the prosperous capital of the Ptolemaic Kingdom. Control of Egypt passed to Ptolemy I (son of Lagos), the founder of the Ptolemaic Dynasty (305-30 BC).

Assyria and Babylonia
Alexander sent his scouts with a message to the people of Babylon before entering the city: "I shall not enter your houses".

Persia
The text is a quote from Plutarch's Life of Artaxerxes. In the quote, Artaxerxes is considering whether to leave a statue of Cyrus the Great lying on the ground because of the expeditions Cyrus led against Greece, or to set it up again because of Cyrus's magnanimity and virtues in other respects.

Fall of the Persian Empire and the East
In 329 BC, Spitamenes betrayed Bessus to Ptolemy and Bessus was executed. Later, Spitamenes raised Sogdiana in revolt but was defeated by Alexander in the Battle of Gabai. Spitamenes was killed by his own men and Sogdiana sued for peace.

Problems and plots
In the Central Asian campaign, a second plot against Alexander's life was revealed, this one instigated by his own royal pages. His official historian, Callisthenes of Olynthus, was implicated in the plot and tortured on the rack as punishment. It remains unclear if Callisthenes was actually involved in the plot.

Macedon in Alexander's absence
During Alexander's campaign in Asia, Greece enjoyed a period of peace and prosperity. Alexander sent back vast sums from his conquest, which stimulated the economy and increased trade across his empire. However, Alexander's constant demands for troops and the migration of Macedonians throughout his empire depleted Macedon's strength, greatly weakening it in the years after Alexander, and ultimately led to its subjugation by Rome after the Third Macedonian War (171–168 BC).

Coinage
Alexander did not impose uniform imperial coinage throughout his new conquests. Persian coins continued to circulate in all the satrapies of the empire.

Indian campaign


Forays into the Indian subcontinent
After defeating King Porus in the Battle of the Hydaspes, Alexander made him an ally and appointed him as satrap. He also founded two cities on opposite sides of the Hydaspes river, naming one Bucephala and the other Nicaea.

Revolt of the Hellenic army
Alexander sent most of his army to Carmania with general Craterus, while he led the rest back to Persia through the Gedrosian Desert. He reached Susa in 324 BC, but lost many men to the harsh desert.

Last years in Persia
Alexander organized a banquet for his army to celebrate the end of the campaign of India and the onset of the invasion of the Arabian Peninsula. The wine was usually heavily watered.

Death and succession
None

Post-death events
After Alexander's death, the Macedonian army was likened to the blinded Cyclops, due to the many random and disorderly movements that it made. The anarchy between the generals was also likened to the blinded Cyclops.

Division of the Macedonian Empire
After the death of Alexander the Great, his generals fought for control of the Macedonian Empire. The satrapies handed out by Perdiccas at the Partition of Babylon became power bases each general used to bid for power. After the assassination of Perdiccas in 321 BC, Macedonian unity collapsed, and 40 years of war between "The Successors" (Diadochi) ensued before the Hellenistic world settled into three stable power blocs: Ptolemaic Egypt, Seleucid Syria and East, and Antigonid Macedonia. In the process, both Alexander IV and Philip III were murdered.

Last plans
Many scholars doubt the historicity of Alexander's last plans due to their enormous scale. Ernst Badian argued that they were exaggerated by Perdiccas in order to ensure that the Macedonian troops voted not to carry them out. Other scholars have proposed that they were invented by later authors within the tradition of the Alexander Romance.

Character


Generalship
Alexander adapted his forces to his opponents' style.
In Bactria and Sogdiana, he used his javelin throwers and archers to prevent outflanking movements, while massing his cavalry at the center.
In India, he opened his ranks to envelop Porus's elephant corps and used their sarissas to strike upwards and dislodge the elephants' handlers.

Physical appearance
Alexander's hair color was described as "ξανθὴν" (xanthín), which could mean yellowish, brownish or reddish. It is sometimes claimed that he had one blue and one brown eye. Reconstruction of the original polychromy on his sarcophagus indicates that he was depicted with brown eyes and chestnut brown hair.

Personality
Alexander believed himself to be a deity, or at least sought to deify himself. He adopted elements of Persian dress and customs at court, notably proskynesis, which was one aspect of Alexander's broad strategy aimed at securing the aid and support of the Iranian upper classes. However, this behaviour cost him the sympathies of many of his countrymen. However, Alexander also was a pragmatic ruler who understood the difficulties of ruling culturally disparate peoples, many of whom lived in kingdoms where the king was divine. Thus, rather than megalomania, his behaviour may have been a practical attempt at strengthening his rule and keeping his empire together.

Personal relationships
Alexander accumulated a harem in the style of Persian kings, but he used it rather sparingly. He was infatuated by Roxana but did not force himself on her. He formed strong friendships with women, including Ada of Caria and Darius's mother Sisygambis.

Battle record


Legacy
Alexander's legacy extended beyond his military conquests, and his reign marked a turning point in European and Asian history. His campaigns greatly increased contacts and trade between East and West, and vast areas to the east were significantly exposed to Greek civilization and influence. Some of the cities he founded became major cultural centers, many surviving into the 21st century.

Hellenistic kingdoms
Alexander's empire began to collapse even during his lifetime.
After Alexander's death, Chandragupta Maurya took advantage of the power vacuum and conquered the Nanda Empire to establish the Maurya Empire.

Founding of cities
Alexander the Great founded many cities, some of which are still named after him today, including Alexandria (Egypt), Alexandreia (Greece), Iskenderun (Turkey), Iskandariya (Iraq) and Kandahar (Afghanistan).

Funding of temples
In 2023, archaeologists suggested that a Greek temple at Girsu in Iraq, was founded by Alexander. The temple honors Zeus and two of his sons, Heracles and Alexander.

Hellenization
Following Alexander the Great's conquests in the east, Hellenistic influence on Indian art was far-reaching. In architecture, examples of the Ionic order can be found as far as Pakistan and India. The Corinthian order is also heavily represented in the art of Gandhara.

Influence on Rome
Alexander's conquests in West Asia and North Africa spread Greek culture and language, which served as a "precondition" for the later Roman expansion into these territories and entire basis for the Byzantine Empire.

Letters
Alexander wrote and received numerous letters, but no originals survive. A few official letters addressed to the Greek cities survive in copies inscribed in stone and the content of others is sometimes reported in historical sources. It is an open question how reliable such quotations are. Several fictitious letters, some perhaps based on actual letters, made their way into the Romance tradition.

In legend
After Alexander's death, a quantity of legendary material coalesced into a text known as the Alexander Romance, later falsely ascribed to Callisthenes and therefore known as Pseudo-Callisthenes.
This text underwent numerous expansions and revisions throughout Antiquity and the Middle Ages, containing many dubious stories, and was translated into numerous languages, for example Middle Persian, Syriac and probably Arabic.

In ancient and modern culture
Aubrey Thomas de Vere wrote Alexander the Great, a Dramatic Poem in ancient and modern culture.

Historiography
The earliest surviving accounts of Alexander the Great's life were written by his contemporaries Callisthenes, Ptolemy, Nearchus, Aristobulus and Onesicritus. Their works are lost, but later works based on these original sources have survived. The earliest of these is Diodorus Siculus (1st century BC), followed by Quintus Curtius Rufus (mid-to-late 1st century AD), Arrian (1st to 2nd century AD), the biographer Plutarch (1st to 2nd century AD), and finally Justin, whose work dated as late as the 4th century. Of these, Arrian is generally considered the most reliable.
